# Learning the Command Line Interface and SDK in C# and .NET

The .NET framework Software Development Kit (SDK) used to lack a unified command-line interface. This changed with the introduction of the .NET Core and the .NET SDK. When you install these SDKs, they include the .NET Command Line Interface (CLI), a set of tools for building, testing, and deploying .NET applications. The CLI provides a uniform approach for developers to interact with .NET on any operating system, including Windows, macOS, and Linux. The CLI is open-source and available on GitHub. This tutorial guides you through using the .NET CLI, providing examples and illustrating how to make the most of this valuable toolset.

## Table of Contents
- [The .NET CLI](#the-net-cli)
- [Basic Commands](#basic-commands)
- [Creating a New Project](#creating-a-new-project)
- [Building the Project](#building-the-project)
- [Running the Application](#running-the-application)
- [Publishing Your Application](#publishing-your-application)
- [In-Depth: Publishing Your Application](#publishing-your-application-in-depth)
  - [Framework-Dependent](#framework-dependent)
  - [Self-Contained](#self-contained)

<a name="the-net-cli"></a>
## The .NET CLI

The .NET CLI revolves around the `dotnet` driver, a single executable that enables interaction with the various components of the .NET CLI. Using it is as simple as typing `dotnet`, followed by the command name. If you need help, use the `h` switch:

```bash
dotnet -h
```

This command displays your current .NET version, the SDK version, and a list of available commands.

<a name="basic-commands"></a>
## Basic Commands

The .NET CLI offers several basic commands that will be prefixed by `dotnet`. 

- `dotnet new`: Create a new project, configuration file, or solution based on a specified template.
- `dotnet build`: Build a project and all its dependencies.
- `dotnet run`: Run your application directly from the source code with one command, which builds the project first.
- `dotnet publish`: Publish your finished .NET project.

<a name="creating-a-new-project"></a>
## Creating a New Project

Before creating a new project, you can search available templates on the Microsoft servers using `dotnet new` with the `search` parameter. For example, to find templates related to Maui, type:

```bash
dotnet new search Maui
```

This command returns a list of templates, including Microsoft and third-party templates.

If you know the name of the template you want to use, create a new project using the following command:

```bash
dotnet new console -lang c# -o MyProject
```

This command creates a new project from the `console` template using C# (specified by `-lang c#`) and outputs the project to the `MyProject` directory.

<a name="building-the-project"></a>
## Building the Project

Once your project is set up, compile and build it using the `dotnet build` command. Run this command inside the directory containing your project file (`.csproj` or `.vbproj`). 

```bash
cd MyProject
dotnet build
```

This command creates a `bin` directory containing the build output, including the executable and other files.

<a name="running-the-application"></a>
## Running the Application

Run your application with the `dotnet run` command. This command automatically builds the project if the `bin` directory is not present, then runs your application.

```bash
dotnet run
```

You should see your program's output. In the case of a basic console application, it might be "Hello, World."

<a name="publishing-your-application"></a>
## Publishing Your Application

Publish your application using `dotnet publish`. This command creates a `publish` folder in the `bin` directory, containing the files to distribute to end users.

```bash
dotnet publish
```

You can also create a self-contained version of your application, which includes all required .NET files for the application to run on the end user's computer. To build a self-contained application, use the `--self-contained` flag:

```bash
dotnet publish --self-contained true
```

This command creates a new folder in the `bin` directory specific to your operating system. Inside, you will find your executable and DLLs along with all necessary .NET files.

<a name="publishing-your-application-in-depth"></a>
## In-Depth: Publishing Your Application

Publishing your .NET application can range from a one-time event, such as releasing a yearly version of the .NET SDK, to a continuous process like modern web applications. In the latter case, automatic publishing and deployment usually form part of a DevOps continuous deployment (CD) pipeline. Tools like Azure Pipelines and GitHub Actions enable continuous deployment. If you choose this approach, you'll run the .NET build and publish commands in your CD pipeline.

However, this section won't delve into continuous deployment tools. Instead, we'll focus on understanding the two different modes of publishing your .NET application: Framework-Dependent and Self-Contained.

<a name="framework-dependent"></a>
### Framework-Dependent

Publishing your app as Framework-Dependent produces an application that includes only your application and its dependencies. Users of the application have to separately install the .NET runtime.

```bash
dotnet publish --configuration Release
```

<a name="self-contained"></a>
### Self-Contained

In contrast, a Self-Contained application includes the .NET runtime, libraries, your application, and its dependencies. Users can run it on a machine that doesn't have the .NET runtime installed. This mode results in a larger number of files and significantly more storage space usage.

```bash
dotnet publish --configuration Release --runtime win10-x64 --self-contained true
```

For both Framework-Dependent and Self-Contained deployments, you have two options for output: a folder containing all the files or a single executable.

The single file model is popular because it's convenient to add one file to a computer and have the application work.

```bash
dotnet publish --configuration Release --runtime win10-x64 --self-contained true /p:PublishSingleFile=true
```

While it's possible to run publish commands from the command line, you can also publish within Visual Studio. This process uses profile settings to control the publish operation. Here you can specify a Release configuration, target .NET framework, deployment mode, and target runtime.

Because .NET is cross-platform, you will need to publish multiple times if you aim to support multiple runtimes. For example, you can publish for Windows, OS X, and Linux, and you can target different CPUs like X64 and ARM.
