# Reflection and Attributes

This tutorial introduces two integral .NET concepts, Reflection and Attributes, that are frequently used together in .NET programming. We'll start by explaining each concept and their usage in .NET, followed by examples that demonstrate how these features can be applied in various contexts.

## Table of Contents

- [Reflection in .NET](#reflection-in-net)
  - [Using Reflection](#using-reflection)
  - [Reflection in Action: JetBrains dotPeek](#reflection-in-action-jetbrains-dotpeek)
  - [Dynamic Applications with Reflection](#dynamic-applications-with-reflection)
- [Attributes in .NET](#attributes-in-net)
  - [Adding Attributes to Your Code](#adding-attributes-to-your-code)
  - [Examples of Attributes in Action](#examples-of-attributes-in-action)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

## Reflection in .NET <a name="reflection-in-net"></a>

Reflection is a feature that allows .NET code to introspect itself, or other assemblies, to find out more information about types and metadata.

### Using Reflection <a name="using-reflection"></a>

With reflection, we can programmatically load a .NET assembly and get information about it. Below is an example of how we might use reflection to load an assembly and print out its full name:

```csharp
Assembly myAssembly = Assembly.LoadFrom("MyAssembly.dll");
Console.WriteLine("Full name: " + myAssembly.FullName);
```

We can also access more detailed information about the assembly, such as its version number, culture value, and public key token:

```csharp
Console.WriteLine("Version: " + myAssembly.GetName().Version);
Console.WriteLine("Culture: " + myAssembly.GetName().CultureInfo);
Console.WriteLine("Public Key Token: " + BitConverter.ToString(myAssembly.GetName().GetPublicKeyToken()));
```

Reflection also allows us to list all the types contained within the assembly, i.e., all the classes and structs. Once we have a class, we can get the chain of base classes it extends from, and the interfaces it implements. For example:

```csharp
Type[] types = myAssembly.GetTypes();
foreach(Type type in types)
{
    Console.WriteLine("Type: " + type.Name);
    Console.WriteLine("Base Type: " + type.BaseType);
    Console.WriteLine("Is Class: " + type.IsClass);
}
```

And for each type, we can discover the type members, which include methods, properties, and fields:

```csharp
Type myType = myAssembly.GetType("MyNamespace.MyClass");
MethodInfo[] methods = myType.GetMethods();
foreach(MethodInfo method in methods)
{
    Console.WriteLine("Method Name: " + method.Name);
    Console.WriteLine("Return Type: " + method.ReturnType);
}
```

### Reflection in Action: JetBrains dotPeek <a name="reflection-in-action-jetbrains-dotpeek"></a>

JetBrains dotPeek is a tool that uses reflection to disassemble .NET assemblies and show the contents. In dotPeek, you can navigate namespaces, classes, methods, and properties, and view their details. You can even see the IL (Intermediate Language) code and the reconstructed C# code.

### Dynamic Applications with Reflection <a name="dynamic-applications-with-reflection"></a>

Reflection can also be used to create dynamic, extensible applications. This feature is especially useful in scenarios where a host application needs to dynamically load and use plugins or add-ins that weren't known at compile-time.

Here's an example. Suppose a host application requires that an add-in implement an `IHostAddIn` interface. The add-in developer would implement this interface:

```csharp
public class MyAddIn : IHostAddIn
{
    // Implementation details...
}
```

The host application could then use reflection to load the add-in assemblies at runtime, discover classes that implement `IHostAddIn`, instantiate those classes, and start using the code within:

```csharp
Assembly pluginAssembly = Assembly.LoadFrom("MyAddIn.dll");
foreach (Type type in pluginAssembly.GetTypes())
{
    if (type.GetInterface("IHostAddIn") != null)
    {
        IHostAddIn plugin = (IHostAddIn)Activator.CreateInstance(type);
        plugin.SomeMethod();
    }
}
```

## Attributes in .NET <a name="attributes-in-net"></a>

Attributes in .NET provide a way to attach metadata, or extra descriptive information, to elements of your code. They are like special tags or labels that you can add to certain parts of your code. 

### Adding Attributes to Your Code <a name="adding-attributes-to-your-code"></a>

Attributes can be attached to types (classes, structs, enums, interfaces, and delegates), methods, parameters of a method, return values of methods, and type members (fields, properties, and events). 

Here's an example of applying the `Serializable` attribute to a class:

```csharp
[Serializable]
public class MyClass
{
    // Class details...
}
```

When the code is compiled, this attribute information is added to the compiled assembly's metadata. Other tools can then use reflection to discover which parts of your code have the attribute applied.

### Examples of Attributes in Action <a name="examples-of-attributes-in-action"></a>

Let's consider some examples.

In a unit testing framework, attributes can be used to indicate which methods to run as tests. For example:

```csharp
[Fact]
public void MyTestMethod()
{
    // Test details...
}
```

Attributes can also be used to pass additional information to the testing framework. In this example, the `Trait` attribute is used to pass extra information to the testing framework about each test:

```csharp
[Trait("Category", "Financial")]
[Fact]
public void MyTestMethod()
{
    // Test details...
}
```

Attributes are also used by the .NET libraries. For instance, the `Serializable` attribute is used by the .NET `BinaryFormatter` to know whether a class can be serialized or not:

```csharp
[Serializable]
public class MyClass
{
    // Class details...
}
```

Attributes are frequently used with developer tools. For instance, the `Category` attribute can be used to categorize properties in the Visual Studio Properties window:

```csharp
public class MyUserControl : UserControl
{
    [Category("Network")]
    public string IPAddress { get; set; }
    
    [Category("Network")]
    public int Port { get; set; }
}
```

## Conclusion <a name="conclusion"></a>

Reflection and attributes are key features of the .NET framework that enable a range of advanced functionalities. They enable the creation of dynamic, extensible applications, and help in separating concerns in an application. Attributes also help in code generation with the newer .NET code generation tools. There are hundreds of attributes available in the .NET SDK and many more in third-party libraries available on NuGet. Understanding these features opens up new possibilities in .NET development.
